You should open with that, too. Would have been done in, like, ten minutes.
Hi, I'm Stu Willis.
And I'm Chas Fisher.
And I am Julio Olivera.
And welcome to Draft Zero, a podcast where three emerging filmmakers try to work out what makes great screenplays work, or, in this case, movies. Or a movie.
Today on the podcast, we are trialing a slightly different format Stu has dubbed the “Short Shot”.
So given how close both those words sound to shit, I wonder how long this name is going to last.
But we are talking about the character journeys of Steve Rogers, Captain America and Tony Stark, Iron Man, in the box office behemoth, AVENGERS: ENDGAME.
And this topic came about because I wrote a review on Letterboxd saying how disappointed I was in the lack of dramatization of any kind of character journey for
Tony and Steve and
Stu and Julio both vociferously disagreed with my views, and it turned into what felt very much like a Draft Zero episode there in the comments, and we decided to record it instead.
So we can just pull up Letterboxd right now and read over it and then we'll be done.
Yeah, we’re just going to act out the comments. That's it.
Okay, so my broad thesis with which Stu and Julio may or may not
disagree with, is I felt that there was a distinct lack of
journey for Steve and Tony in ENDGAME, and I felt that from my point of view, that's because they made a series of decisions without ever,
my perspective being presented with a dramatic choice to do this or this; they're always presented with:
And now you should do this, and now you should do this, and now you should do this.
But before we get too critical on this, I just want a disclaimer for any fans out there: Julio gave this movie five stars.
I did not give it five stars, but I think we all admired how hard it was to pull off what they pulled off.
And we're certainly not haters in this podcast.
I'm going to be more specific, because I am looking over your Letterboxd review, Chas, and I'm going to hold you to it like you're a politician,
which is that you said, “My main issue is that they didn't deepen my understanding or really challenge the characters of Tony or Cap.
The film became about loss and battling grief.
And while that battle is fought by all of them as a group, I didn't get much of their individual flavours of loss. In fact, I’d venture that the only characters that have any sense of developed journey are Thor, Natasha and Clint”, whom we are not going to discuss.
As if anyone pays any attention to Black Widow anyway. Certainly not the MCU. Yes. Directed by an Australian. “This is in stark contrast to what we've been achieved in the first AVENGERS film.” Okay, this is the important bit: “Don't get me wrong.
Oooooh.
Getting a prequel.
They nailed the end to Cap and Tony's journeys. Nailed it.
But those two final scenes could have been tacked onto the end of almost any AVENGERS movie.
I wanted more from what preceded that ending.”
In other words, you felt that where they ended up at the end of the film could have been at the beginning of the film, or a the end of INFINITY WAR. Yeah.
I felt that they could. It was almost irrelevant to the plot of the film that we'd seen in ENDGAME.
It was “Tony Stark sacrifices himself and Cap chooses to go live a life for himself, to stop serving.”
Well, let’s be clear: Tony tried to sacrifice himself of the end of AVENGERS, but he still had a contract for a sequel.
So on one level, that's correct.
But if we're talking about the end to character journeys, at what point are we expecting them to be related to plot anyway?
Yeah, true enough. Okay, so can I highlight…
What is our demand there?
I guess what my issues are, and you guys can just tell me why I'm completely wrong?
So for Tony, let's put that in the context of what did the snap do for Cap and Tony's characters?
So we come back after the five years and their failure to defeat Thanos, and I was really fascinated with how they set up how the snap had affected Tony and Steve.
So Tony's happily with Pepper,
He's got a daughter, Morgana or Morgan.
Come on. That's your favourite story.
I love you tons.
Three thousand? That’s crazy.
Go to bed or I’ll sell all your toys.
So he has something to lose. Steve, I think, is really fascinatingly set up where he's no longer an Avenger, like Black Widow is running what's left of the Avengers out of the Avengers
H Q. It feels like Steve is even living in Avengers H.Q.
You here to do your laundry?
No. I saw a pod of whales when I was coming over the bridge. In the Hudson? Fewer ships, cleaner water. You know, if you're about to tell me to look on the bright side,
I'm about to hit you in the head with a peanut butter sandwich.
He's helping people cope with grief by not being a superhero, just by being Steve Rogers. He's given up serving, and he keeps having these lines like:
You know, I keep telling everybody they should move on, and grow. Some do. But not us.
If I move on, who does this? Maybe it doesn't need to be done.
I think you're kind of skipping over an important structural element in the film, which is that there's a time jump in the opening anything. It’s not just the opening act, it's kind of like, more or less the opening sequence.
Because the film opens with the immediate aftermath of the snap.
It's almost like the epilogue to INFINITY WAR.
We have the rescuing of Iron Man, where they talk about how Thanos has achieved exactly what he set out to achieve.
I said we'd lose. You said, “We'll do that together too.” Guess what, Cap. We lost. You weren't there.
And we have the discussion regarding Thanos and going to
Kill Thanos, and they learn something that, in the context of the other films, actually pretty clever set up in hindsight, is that they demonstrate to the audience and to themselves that Thanos can be killed.
But what they show is that what he has done cannot be undone.
If you've seen his film, then I'm just telling you what you've already seen. And if you haven't seen this film, then this is probably just confusing as all hell.
But it's important to run through these beats because what happens after that is we jump five years later and we see how they've dealt with the reality.
Their new reality of a post snap universe. We've actually allowed them to process the trauma and see how the world has changed over those five years. And those contrasts are really important in all those characters.
What is interesting and what is curious or interesting, and we'll see if it comes through in our discussion, is if we agree that all these beats are there, but they land differently for us.
That's kind of an interesting thing to discuss and kind of unpack.
So they've got the end of the first act is, we've got the possibility of inventing time travel, and
Importantly, Tony figures out how to do it.
He gets Pepper’s permission to go and do time travel and when he and Steve meet out in front of avengers H.Q.
They do a little deal with each other.
We got a shot at getting these stones. But I've got to tell you my priorities. Bring back what we lost, I hope. Yes. Keep what I found: have to, at all costs. And maybe not die trying would be nice.
And to me, as soon as that deal happened, I thought to myself, and maybe it's because they had this line in there,
Maybe it's my disappointment or my issues or my lack of feeling at this journey here, is because that line made me think, “Oh, this is the dramatic conflict that is going to emerge later in this film.”
At some point, they're going to force Tony to choose between bringing everyone back and his daughter, or they're going to make Cap have to go back on his word.
That's on you, Chas, to do with your expectations. Probably you were leading with your writer’s brain.
One could also argue that, given that it was about a life that he wanted to live with his daughter, him choosing to sacrifice himself to save everyone is him making a choice that he wouldn't have made it the beginning of the film.
And in fact, the first act was him choosing to do nothing about what had happened.
You've got a lot on the line. Got a wife, a daughter. But I lost someone. Very important to me. A lot of people did. And now now we have a chance to bring her back. To bring everyone back. And you're telling me that you won't even try?
Right. But the other observation I will make is that arguably, particularly for Tony Stark, this is more of a hero's journey structure.
He literally has a refusal of the call, right?
He refuses the call to go out to the adventure, which is given to him by his, in this case, mentor Captain America. And then he goes on the adventure. But the adventure doesn't necessarily mean that he changes internally.
As we've talked about many, many times, those kind of heroes journeys are, often external plot changing.
And as we'll probably talk about the same thing is with Captain America. The characters are always who they are.
It's the kind of the arc of awesome stuff which we've never directly explained in detail.
But it's the universe recognizing how awesome these characters are rather than the character themselves changing. And that's largely being Tony's thing.
I think, Tony, you can argue, stopped changing at the end of the first act of…
Or put another way, his biggest change was at the end of the first act of IRON MAN one, right?
And then AVENGERS was the biggest challenge about whether he was prepared to sacrifice himself,
And then it's just that kind of character loop again and again and again until he breaks the loop, which is ultimately that he makes a decision to sacrifice himself, and he actually dies as opposed to lives.
Yeah, but if that's your broad point, that is almost entirely why I'm disappointed or why I felt an absence of the film, because,
from that point on, when he makes that deal, he's at that point.
”I’m going on the adventure. I'm accepting the call to the Adventure.” He then does not ever get confronted with that choice again.
And so that's it for the rest of the movie, and going by,
We may revisit this with Steve being able to pick up Thor's Hammer and some people saying Steve was always worthy.
If you buy that argument, which is the fucking Russo’s argument, see show notes…
They're not in the movie. Well, I guess one of them is in the movie, but he's not in the movie making that point, so that’s the equivalent of a DVD extra that you never watch.
Well, I think we'll come back to that moment later.
But my point is, then they are not presented with the choice to either get off the adventure again,or to accept the consequences of their adventure.
From that point on, their journey stops when they go, “Yup, we're going on this adventure together.”
And how is that different from any other action movie?
I feel like in CIVIL WAR they have a lot of choices in the third act that both go directly deepening my understanding of their character and create dramatic conflicts.
I would say that in the same way of WINTER SOLDIER.
You know the way that Steve essentially stops being a soldier at the end of that movie and becoming, ah, a force unto himself.
It's kind of like it's all that argument about, “How do you tell a good Superman story” is you make these characters choose between two terrible choices, and…
There was a complete absence of that for me in AVENGERS ENDGAME, which was present in INFINITY WAR, which was present in, for me, at least, in CIVIL WAR and in WINTER SOLDIER.
Well, I think that, just listening in awe as both of you were presenting your arguments as if I was just listening to an episode of Draft Zero, and I completely forgot that I was part of it.
I think that one of the reasons why the movie works for me more than it does for you, Chas.
and it may work differently for me than it works for Stu, even,
It's just that, you know, when I when I get to the end, when I see, like, Tony's journey in here, I feel it. And I felt this.
I've seen it three times now, ENDGAME. And every time I've felt that, even more that it’s not so much about, “okay,
well, his ark is that he used to be selfish, and now he's not, and, you know, he makes the ultimate sacrifice.”
I mean, that's part of it, too. But to me, it's like, the key moment is when he looks up at Doctor Strange and Doctor Strange gives him like the little signal saying “yes, this is the one.”
Background Music
You know, “This is the one reality where we win”, and Tony has to make the decision of like, “Okay, well, then that means they have to kill myself.”
Or does that mean that something else is going on? You know, I mean, there's that close up in slo mo where you just kind of have to make a decision and, at least to me, every time it's felt, and especially on rewatch, it felt that that's him deciding.
Okay, well, I guess that's it for me.
And hopefully things work out. And the idea for him to make that leap, to suddenly decide, like Iron man, Tony stark, the control freak that's been
obsessed with being the protector of the Earth, who wanted to build a shield around the planet and all this stuff to suddenly,
get to the point where he's just ready to say, “All right, well, this is it”,
like in a very conscious way.
I mean, yes, at the end of the first AVENGERS, you know, he's flying the nuke out to through the portal or whatever was happening. But that's, you know, that was more of a spur of the moment decision, where as like here,
I think that he's surrounded by superheroes.
I can see him trying to decide if this is really the only way that it can happen in this because, you know, they've set up that he has a family and everything.
So to me, that makes a difference, the entire movie has this theme of talking about moving on and letting go and all this stuff and in a way, it's just Iron Man just deciding that, “Alright, well, this is the time when I'm just calling it quits, I'm going out with a bang.”
The world doesn’t need Iron Man anymore, where as he once believed they did.
Tony, look at me.
We're going to be okay. You can rest now.
And that completely underscores. It, you know, is like it's not just that “Oh, well, this happened in INFINITY WAR and ENDGAME,”
The fact that they do this as the finale to, like, twenty movies, twenty one movies, through which we've seen this entire universe of super beings develop… that has something to do with it.
You know, the fact that maybe Iron Man would have died a different person ten movies ago, before we had all these other superheroes, all these other beings that can protect the Earth. But now he is ready to go.
You know, he I think that that factors in his decision, I think that that's something that gives them a way. That's what makes it different than if he was dying at the end of AVENGERS or AGE OF ULTRON.
He's a different person, and I don't think that he could have made that decision maybe earlier in the movie, when he was still dealing with all the unresolved issues from INFINITY WAR.
I think that angle maybe has something to do with it.
You're looking at it as, “well, this is an Iron Man movie and I'm looking at it as though this is the twentieth, twenty first movie in a long series of MCU developments.
So I guess that's why it wasn't underwhelming to me. It was like, oh, of course.
You know, it's time for Iron Man to retire and he's making that decision in a way that he doesn't do at the beginning of the ENDGAME. You know that it’s more like Thanos makes a decision for him.
Yeah, I think you've made a very good counter argument that that moment between him and Doctor Strange is him making a decision.
But I think you and I feel that having watched it three times, and I certainly didn't feel it the first time I watched it because he's going like, do I act or do I not act?
And in the context of these films and what I know of this character, that's not a choice.
Like he's not like looking at Doctor Strange saying, “You know, what is it time to go to Starbucks and have a coffee?”
So it’s like, “Do I act or do I not act because we don't know what the decision is? And so you know that the wonderful thing in the end of AVENGERS is him,
when he's flying that nuke up, he calls Pepper.
Stark. You know, that's a one way trip. Save the rest for the turn, J. Shall I try Miss Potts? Might as well.
And, you know, he also calls Pepper in INFINITY WAR when he's on the spaceship going into space, he leaves a voice recording for Pepper when he thinks he's dying in the spaceship.
There was dramatization off him acknowledging what he was sacrificing,
whereas maybe interestingly, it's me being a parent coming to this like,
it would have punched me in the feels if he called Morgan to say goodbye and he couldn’t, there, in the middle of this huge fucking climactic battle.
But he left her a voicemail. I mean, that's really that's almost what you're asking for.
So I thought I’d better record a little greeting in the case of an untimely death on my part, you know, not that death at any time isn’t untimely. This time travel thing that they're going to try and pull off tomorrow, it’s got me scratching my head about the survivability of this whole thing.
But again, that’s the hero gig. Part of the journey is the end. What am I even tripping for? Everything's gonna work out exactly the way it's supposed to.
I love you three thousand.
Yes, and it goes back to what we're talking about. He had made, by leaving that voicemail, he had made the decision to die. And we may come back to this in terms of how they dramatized the end of Cap’s journey. He had made that decision offscreen.
Well, I wasn't — well, we were with him. You just described the moment, it's with him and Doctor Strange. But I didn't understand at that moment, watching him, that he was deciding to sacrifice raising his daughter.
Okay. I mean, this is I think part of what you mean by disappointment, is disappointment relative to your own expectations, Chas.
Yes, absolutely.
Because if you listen to Julio and I, we’re coming from a different set of context and when does not argue, went through it in craft terms,
except maybe the between Julio and me is that I can kind of speak Draft Zero a little bit.
Yes. I mean, I don't need to talk about wounds and,
loops and whatever, like I'll follow it when you guys were saying it, but it would take me a moment to, like, really translate all and put it back out there in Draft Zero language.
Human. Okay, so I think the first observation to make and actually they’re kind of interrelated,
So as Julio says, this is the end of a long sequence of films, right, three IRON MANs, four AVENGERS, and one CAPTAIN AMERICA film that Iron Man has been in.
So he's been in what, eight or nine films, right?
And as we've talked about in our sequence episodes, generally what happens in films that are action driven is the character questions are resolved at the end of the— at the beginning of the third act. And then it's just the plot questions that are resolved.
And in this case, the difficulty of doing a film in this kind of structure is that that—
But we get the same thing. I mean, this is like a Walter White structure. The character has stopped.
The last true character decision that they make is the beginning of the first act.
And then it's just resolving the plot questions. I think when he is turning up at the Avengers, that speech about “I don't want to die,”
Is him actually realizing the stakes on this mission that this is him getting shipped out to war, right?
And that's in contrast to INFINITY WAR. It was an accident that he ended up getting caught up with Thanos.
This is him making a very active choice to do something which is very dangerous and all he is joking, joking around early on is actually masking the fact that he knows,
that is potentially a one way kamikaze mission for someone.
Yeah, and I agree with you on that. And how— again, I don't want to, like, criticize Markus and McFeely because I think they and the Russo brothers have done just something absolutely astonishing.
But even if he'd had, like, just a little humorous goodbye with Morgan and that later in the movie, we get a call back to that and realize that then he knew right that that was his goodbye to her.
That they've chosen to play it as a reveal because it's for the audience rather than us in a moment with the character for the character they've. They've pushed that moment.
Yes, and they've done the exact same thing with Steve.
Yeah, you know, they're making their choices to pull the heartstrings of the audience, rather from us to be inside of the moment with the character.
But we know contextually.
There's no way this film’s first act turning points going to be Iron Man going, “I’m out.” Alright, we know that's not a possibility.
So that tinges everything. It does, right? It's like after watching Solo, Seeing all the stuff with Han and Chewbacca is just so sad.
It's like him and spending time with Morgan in the bed and him saying goodnight to her, that is full of pathos.
And I imagine on the rewatch, I've only seen it once because I don't pay the Disney tithe,
unlike you guys, him saying goodbye to her is tinged with like an emotional pathos.
That is about the audience perspective, and I think, but maybe it's because you, in that moment don't feel that he's aware that this is the last time he's saying to her but having not having been sent off to war,
I can imagine that there being plenty of moments for people like that, you are in the armed services that are going on those kinds of missions that are like,
this could be the last time and that's kind of every time, you know.
Yes, I think you know, you have that scene just trying to put myself in the shoes of the writers.
And I think that you have to kind of pick which scene you go with.
Do you go with the scene where they have that interaction before he knows he's going?
Or maybe he's had an inkling, right? I think it's after his figure out time travel and his kind of right here. He puts her to bed and, you know, they have the whole I love you three thousand moment.
He says goodbye to her.
I’m just flying by the seat of my pants here. Just assuming that I'm writing AVENGERS, you know, I feel like I only have room for one big moment with the girl and it’s like—
And so then I have to decide. Do I do the pre-decision moment where he is, as you just said, you know, he's unaware, really, that he's maybe he's not thinking,
”Okay, I'm getting shipped out the war” yet, and therefore later on, when we think back, it's gonna have, like, that extra poignancy of “Oh yeah, the last time that they interacted, that we saw them interact, was when he didn't know, or do I not have that scene,
And instead I have a scene where he's saying goodbye to her because he knows what he's getting into and, you know, that comes back later.
As you know, well, we he didn't know that he was saying about her for the last time, but he kind of had an idea.
I don't think that you can have both. I could be wrong. I don't know what you guys think, but I think that
they had to pick one and they went with the one that is not so on the nose, I guess.
You know, I guess it doesn't give you what you wanted, Chas, which was, I guess, that moment where he makes a decision.
And like you said, they'll probably be echoed when we talk about Captain America. But I think it still gives you a structure that works in a different way.
Maybe not so much surprise, because I think that most of us went in expecting Tony to not make it.
But I think I think that it definitely it's a different interaction.
I think if I had to pick between them, I do the the casual interaction that's, you know, kind of melancholy, but not as ominous as, you know, what would happen if he's already decided that he's going and he's just going to say goodbye to her.
I mean, I'm sure they can both be great, be written greatly, perfectly. But the one that we got, it doesn't leave me wishing that they done the different one.
Do you think that they could have done both, that they could have played both moments?
So no, I agree with you, and I think what Stu has somehow managed to say— I won’t say somehow, that's unkind— what Stu has very precisely put his finger on and you as well, Julio, what has bothered me
Is that both of these key decisions made by these characters,
I felt they were undramatised because both times they're largely happening
off screen, and they're revealing to the audience later what those decisions mean, rather than,
us being fully aware of their making the choice at the time, and that clearly it might be a personal preference on my part that I want to be with the character as they're experiencing that rather than be told after the fact,
what they were going through, and I do—
There was one moment, on my third rewatch, where I felt that they could have had both and
that moment is Scott and Steve and Tony are regrouping in two thousand twelve.
They've just tried to get the Tesseract back and they've lost it.
You said that we had one shot. Yes, this was our shot. We shot it. It's shot. Six stones or nothing. Six stones or nothing. You’re repeating yourself, you know that?
You're repeating yourself. You're repeating yourself. You're repeating yourself. You know, you never wanted a time heist. You want on board the time heist. You ruin the time heist. I dropped the ball, ruined the time heist. Is that what I did?
Yeah. Are there any other options? There's no other options. There's no do over, there’s no going anywhere else. We have one particle left, each.
That's it. All right, we use that? Bye bye. You're not going home. Yeah, well, if we don't try no one else is going home either.
They're fucked. They don't have Pym particles. It was one shot or nothing.
It's a really great scene and then Tony says I know where they’re are  more Pym particles and where the Tesseract is at the same time.
Sure? Cap. Captain. Steve.
Sorry, America. Rogers. Look, if you do this and it doesn't work, you don't come back.
Thanks for the pep talk, Pissant. You trust me?
And look, the movie's three fucking hours long and I had to do a lot of research or when to take my pee breaks in the first,
my first view, But,
But surely Draft Zero has given you a lot of practice. It has for me. This is a boring a bit. I'll have a pee.
Chas is talking, Stu disappears.
Chas. I just, I think just completely validated your entire argument. If you just admitted that you walked out in the middle of the movie to go pee.
I'm sorry. Those of us who really care about the craft, we sit there for three hours. We don't go to the bathroom.
I have the bladder of an old man.
You actually have to develop those muscles a little bit. You have to get something that teaches, uh, tantra.
All right, my my bladder control to one side, in that moment when they both decide to go back to nineteen seventies,
at that point, it's Cap and Tony, Cap could have just said, “I made a deal, that you would stay safe. I'm going by myself,” and Tony says, “Fuck you, Rogers. I'm going.”
This is what I mean about dramatizing choice. They were making that decision, but it was never dramatized that, at that point, Tony was genuinely for the kind of, first time in the film, risking not coming back to Morgan,
because he didn't necessarily have a way back.
He hoped he would. He was trying to, but he didn't know, and Steve had made a promise that Tony can't lose what he'd gained.
And in that moment, neither of them make a choice. They just go. “Okay, go.”
Oh, no, I think. I think, actually, Steve makes a choice. Even like Iron Man asks him. Like Tony says, Do you trust me? Until then, Steve hesitates for a moment and he's like, “Okay, let's go.”
Yeah, but what's at stake for Steven in not going?
There's so much more at stake in that moment for Tony going, then for Steve.
The problem is something like this in terms of all your character motivations is as far as stakes of the world go, next to the entire universe
ending, the stakes were pretty much as high as they can possibly go in the context of this film, of the context of this universe, right? So it's going to motivate all their choices. In comparison,
their individual issues pale. You know that they can't help.
They do, but that's what's interesting.
But well, I mean, that's the whole first act of Tony.
I guess part of this is it's like, you say, the I don’t feel these choices are dramatized, but it seems like, particularly when it comes to Tony,
it's one, maybe two key choices that you felt like weren't dramatized right, which is Tony's decision—
Wasn't his decision to sacrifice himself it’s that he's just— he's made the decision that his speech about “I’m not willing to give up my family for all of this.”
By the end of the first act, he's overturned that and he’s ultimately made the decision that he may go on a one way journey, correct?
Yes, as as the movie plays out when he's saying I can't risk losing what I've gained, he's actually, as the film later dramatizes,
He's already made that choice as he's saying it. He's like, I am prepared to risk losing what I've gained, according to your guys readings of the film, as you've told them to me so far.
Well, no, no, no. I think that that means a different thing when he's saying I can't risk losing what I gained,
I think he's talking about them like his family disappearing whenever like the snap happens, the second snap through whatever it is that they end up doing.
He doesn't want to change history. It's different from him dying.
That's what he attacks it at the end. He's like, and if I survived and that's great, you know, ideally not dying.
But yeah, I don't think he ever goes back on that.
I mean, I don't think if I think that if, you know, doing the snap on his own meant that his family stopped existing, then you know you're dealing with a different movie.
Yes, but then Tony hasn't been changed at all by becoming a father.
Essentially, he's still like, “Yeah, I don't give a shit about whether I'm there for Pepper or my daughter, just so long as I saved the universe.”
But that's the decision he makes, though.
That's exactly what happened.
Exactly. And this is why I'm like this film didn't deepen who Tony Stark was by becoming a parent.
It didn't show me. And the same way Steve wasn't.
He has all these sayings in the first act about maybe we don't need to be here. Or maybe we just let the universe take care of itself. Maybe we don't. And then he says all those things, but every single choice he makes along the way is actually to still be the hero and choose it.
On that level. I don't disagree with you, Chas. The point is, it's a Marvel superhero film.
I fully expect these characters to behave exactly like they're who they are at every possible opportunity, right?
To stay in their loops.
They're going to be just in their loops. That's exactly who Tony is, right?
I was going to make the observation, and then I realized I was wrong, I was like maybe Tony's journey and this is towards humility, right? In that at the beginning, he is very, like he is angry at Steve Rogers.
I believe I remember telling Tony alive otherwise that what we needed was a suit of armour around the world. Remember that? Whether it impacted our precious freedoms or not, that's what we need.
And then at the end, there is this idea that maybe that he recognizes, there are all these superheroes, and realizes that the world no longer needs him.
But that's undermined when he says:
I am Iron Man.
He's still dying. He's sacrificing himself for the same reason as the beginning of AVENGERS: because he loves being a fucking hero.
I think there's a difference between the Iron Man of AVENGERS dying versus, you know, who's kind of flirting with Pepper versus
the Iron Man of ENDGAME dying, who has a family. I mean, actually, when you say that—
If you're saying that, they haven't dramatized it.
But if he is saying— let's let Julio explain how he believes they dramatized it, because he can say it's been dramatized, it just didn't work for you,
Chas, that's a difference from them not having done it. We’ve pointed out that both ways that you think that haven’t been dramatized were, just not in ways that were were effective for you.
I mean, I think that, whatever, take issues with the idea that that Tony Stark, father, family man,
is basically that it hasn't changed them just from the moment that you have that scene where he sort of asked for permission.
Tony, trying to get you to stop has been one of the few failures of my entire life.
Something tells me maybe I should put it in a lockbox and drop it to the bottom of the lake. Go to bed.
But would you be able to rest?
I mean, it doesn’t matter matter that he knows that both him and Pepper are kind of going through the motions, although
maybe you guys feel differently. I feel that if Pepper had said no, he wouldn't have done it. He wouldn't have gone.
And if I'm reading that scene differently from the two of you, maybe that's something to look into.
But I actually saw it as, “Oh, wow, look, this is Tony Stark asking for permission.”
That's that's something that wouldn't have happened, you know, two movies ago, three movies ago, however long. It might be that maybe the change
that happened to Iron Man, it's presented much earlier in the movie. To me you're asking about “Hey, I want us hear him make the decision. I want to see the moment he makes a decision to just go to the past and risk it all.”
But I never needed it. And I think that it goes back to the fact that we've spent so many movies with this guy.
I mean, at this point, unless you're going to show me something that's truly new, like that moment with Pepper, where he asks for permission, I don't really need it.
I needed the scene with Pepper, like if they’d shown him just going on the mission without talking to Pepper, that would have felt weird to me, but showing him making the decision to go back in time because it’s the only way to go, I don't need to see that,
Would it have made for a good scene, for an interesting scene
to watch? I guess. But in the in the context of a three hour movie, I'm fine with it not being there, especially because obviously having seen the movie three times, I don't feel like I've needed it all three times that the ending worked for me.
Oh, oh. The only reason why I highlight that scene is I didn't need it on the first two viewings either. And I'm not saying that I needed it in the third. I just saw it as “Oh, my God.
Tony's just risked everything for him personally,” right? Without that being acknowledged in any way.
Also, we're completely like skipping like a big thing that I always forget
it's there until it happens in the movie, which is: it's not just about his family. I mean the other thing that's weighing on him is the whole Peter Parker aspect of it.
It's huge.
And that’s, I mean, that's also something else like that’s Tony Stark risking, you know, he has a connection with him that he doesn't have with other characters they didn’t have before, and we see that.
I mean, you see the moment where he grabs Peter's picture and, you know, looks at it and I mean, that's him
Background Music
also making a decision, is that before, that's when he decides to do the time travel, right there.
That's when he starts experimenting, right? So that's the where he knows that we owes something to those who are lost, which is pretty similar, could play the exact excerpt. But essentially, when Black Widow and Steve rogers and Ant Man turn up.
I know you've got a lot on the line. A wife, a daughter.
But I lost someone very important to me. A lot of people did. And now now we have a chance to bring her back. To bring everyone back. And you're telling me that you won't even—
And because his people made it, right, he's got his family. He's not prepared to risk that because he's got it.
And then he looks— he's got that connection with Peter that they've dramatized that kind of fatherly affection that he feels like he owes them. Um, and as you know, I'm not the parent here, but parents are willing to sacrifice themselves, I suppose. Apparently.
I'm not sure I would.
Peter Parker is kind of a surrogate son, so he is preparing to sacrifice himself to save his surrogate son, and he's not risking his daughter. I agree with Julio. I got that interpretation of that speech as we're not
altering the timeline, and the film goes a great length to explain how they're not altering the timeline.
You know, they're altering a stream of the universe or whatever.
I agree with all your arguments.
I guess what I'm Maybe what I'm feeling is boiled down to,
you know, I've been so conditioned for the hero's journey for the hero's journey, for both these characters to essentially end when they decide to go on
the mission felt very strange to me.
And maybe I'm just like holding on to some kind of narrative convention rather than actually specifics of these people.
But again, I'm talking about Tony's decision to go back in time. If instead of Tony trying to convince Cap, if it was Cap trying to convince Tony to stay,
that would have been a nice, fascinating little beat that dramatized the decision for me.
Background Music
And in the same way, when Cap sees Peggy back in nineteen seventy, and then it's him that goes and hurries up Tony, when he's talking to his father.
If it was Tony had that be with his father and then goes looking for Steve,
and says Steve to go, then suddenly that is a decision for Steve, like, sorry— it's a dramatized choice.
Okay, so let's take a moment to clunkily change gears and—
Well, wait, before we leave Iron Man, before we leave Iron Man: I do have a question just because it was brought up. But I'm really curious.
It's true. I mean, you don’t have kid, Stu. I don't have kids.
But Chas does. And that could be a valid reaction if you, as a father, felt deeply disappointed by how
Tony Stark handled, you know, his responsibilities to his daughter and to his wife.
So do you see that?
Especially the first time you watch it? I guess, did that bother you? Or really, were you kind of resentful toward him for making that decision?
Yeah, well, resentful is not the right word, but I feel like what he was giving up wasn't made clear. And from my understanding of your guys’ read is that right from the beginning, Tony was like,
yeah, I'm here to save the universe. And I want to save the universe in a way that Pepper and Morgan stay alive. But I'm cool, you know, if I have to bite it.
I thought it was a bit more as, “ideally, I don't die doing that, but I am happy to— Ideally, I don’t die”— that's big difference. That’s a double negative.
Well, yeah, and also the way that the movie develops. I mean, when he's making that statement, he's going on a time heist. He has no idea of knowing that
you know, that movie ends with Thanos actually attacking Earth the way that he does,
so he has to recontextualize that that idea of like, “Oh, well, I'm going to sacrifice myself,” you know?
It's when he, I think that the decision that he makes at the end it has more to do, at least in my reading, with like, “Okay,
um, I’m the one that ends this and dies in the process, or do I trust that somebody else could get it?”
I don't think that that has anything to do with him, like,  deciding that it's his family's not as important, you know. It's like my family's important. I have to protect them. But now, do I, you know, do I step up and make the sacrifice now that I know can fix it?
Or do I let somebody else, you know, use the gauntlet? And stop Thanos or whatever it is?
I think there's a difference between the fact that Thanos is there destroying the Earth.
If action is not taken, I think that makes a difference too.
Yeah. I mean, the plot overtakes, right?
But everything every time that I'm raising an issue on your guys response is, “Yeah, he did make the decision. He made it at the beginning or the end of the first act.”
Right. But But there's a decision made right there at the end, in the climax, I mean.
He makes the decision to sacrifice himself. He didn't know at the  beginning that that was specifically what he was going to do. His decision in the beginning was to take the risk.
Yeah, I completely agree, and that, again,
when I was seeing that decision, they've decided to play it as a reveal of that choice like that—
You mean the message to his daughter? Yes, we don't see him make that recording.
No, do you think it would have been as emotionally effective?
I think it would have been fucking emotionally effective if they had done the same, the callback to AVENGERS, where he’s calling Pepper as he’s flying a nuke into space.
But that call was with Morgan.
Yeah, cool. I can't imagine that someone would want to be like, “Hey, I'm dying. I'm going to call my daughter and give her the memory of me on the phone dying to her.” Like there is a version of that that's really awful.
And it's heart wrenching because it's awful. He's not protecting her. He's being selfish.
So the Tom Hanks movie, Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close.
I have no idea what you're talking about.
It was nominated for an Oscar and everything.
He's in 9/11. He's in the Twin Towers when 9/11 happens and he calls home and leaves a voicemail for his kid. As it's happening.
And I think that what's happening in the movie, like one of the big things, is that the kids home, but he doesn't answer the phone, and so he just hears it. It’s pretty brutal when you when you finally figure out that that's what's happening.
I'm not saying that, like, my idea is a good idea or even the best idea I'm just talking about…
They made a choice to not dramatize him making his choice in the moment that he was making it. And when I say dramatized, I mean making it clear to the audience that he was making that choice at the time that he was making it.
He literally turns up at the Avengers office talking about it. It’s…
No, no, his choice to sacrifice himself.
But that happens in the moment, you see him put on the fucking glove.
Yes, if and if you're and if your argument is he makes that choice when he shows up in Avengers in the end of the first act, then you are also agreeing with my point that his journey as a character ends at the end of the first act, not at the
No. Okay.
end of the movie, at the climax of the movie.
Okay, this is very much a discussion of semantics, because I made that point that characters stopped changing at the beginning and that there is still a journey. But it's not—
There's a journey for the character, but the characters stopped changing, and I said, I have no expectations that they will change. So the difference in our opinion is for me, it doesn't bother me. The difference for you is it bothers you, right?
But you're also saying it wasn't dramatized, and my point is saying it did do these things. So the question isn't their absence, because I think they're in there.
It's why you felt it was problematic, which ultimately is a personal experience thing, right, but going thing that they didn't dramatize it and as well, like it clearly did.
And they've done it multiple times, and it works within the genre structure, and it works within the kind of hero's journey structure.
And there are reasons and thinking behind all this, right, as opposed to “It's a mistake” because it's not.
I'm not saying it was a mistake. Clearly, they've done it deliberately.
Saw it three times, so clearly, it worked well enough for you that for all your reservations about it and giving it three and a half stars… and I gave it three and a half stars. But to say that this is a mistake in craft…
That I'm not using that language. You're using that language.
What I am saying is that every time I've watched it, and each of those three times and the third time I went begrudgingly with my mother,
I felt the distinct absence of the character development for those two, which I did not feel in AVENGERS.
I did not even feel it in AGE OF ULTRON. I did not feel it in WINTER SOLDIER. I did not feel it in CIVIL WAR.
I did not feel it in INFINITY WAR. But I felt that absence here in ENDGAME for right or for wrong. And I'm trying to identify why.
Yeah, well, I can't help you with your emotional stuntedness.
Speaking of emotionally stunted, shall we do Captain America?
Yeah, well, you had a really good observation, Stu, about the difference between Steve's choice to remain with Peggy being made off screen as well.
Yes. Okay, so, your main issue seems to be that at the end of the ENDGAME, Steve Rogers decides to effectively retire and stay in the past with Peggy.
And you're like, I never saw that decision dramatized and, well, it's clearly dramatized because we see him turn up, having made that decision.
You're putting words into my mouth.
That's not what I said in my review. Would you read out that that ending felt like it could have been tacked onto any movie, and it would have been emotionally satisfying.
He chooses to be with Peggy, as opposed to being Captain America and keep on fighting and keep on serving.
Okay, I feel like we’re going to have to do just do a whole podcast episode on character journeys and endings.
I think it's to do more with your expectations about what makes a satisfying Cap journey, resolution of the character at the end of the film than anything else.
For me, I agree. I would have liked to see the moment where he makes the decision to travel back in the past. I think there's definitely clues to it when he's in the past and sees Peggy, and he realizes it's a possibility. That's important.
And I think there's some beautiful moments in that end scene when, particularly, I think when:
You know, if you want, I could come with you.
You’re a good man, Sam. This one’s on me, though. Don't do anything stupid till I get back.
He's already made the decision that that's what he's doing. He just hasn't told his friends, which actually makes sense. He's not going to tell any of them because they would talk him out of it.
Oh, yeah.
How can I?
Well, he's told Bucky, at least that's what I think.
It's gonna be okay, Buck.
But he definitely knows what's going on, right? And so the question is, what does it mean for the audience? If we knew that, as opposed to playing it as a reveal, the reveal is what gives it the emotional…
It's the catharsis, right? And actually gives it emotional catharsis. Whereas I think if we're in the decision with him, how does that end, like we see him go tell Bucky, “Bucky, I'm going to go back to Peggy.” It's actually less visual storytelling.
It's the same information, right?
But we don't get his dilemma. You know, the only way, I think, maybe that we can get to what you want is to make it more of a decision that's played in the immediate, which is, “Do I choose left or right?”
You know, that he literally has to choose between a rock and hard place. What's beautiful about the ending of Peggy, is like Iron Man, his journey's done.
It isn't actually a hard choice for him.
Thanos is defeated, you know, he can retire.
It's a choice, but it's not, like, a particularly difficult one.
You could choose not to retire at sixty, Chas. You probably won’t be able to. I mean, if we've got a planet left, you know, we're all going to be working. To eighty.
I mean, someone's got to support me in my old age.
Again. I was very happy with how that character journey resolved, and I just felt that those seeds that they sewed in the first act of how the snap has changed Cap…
Then, as soon as he decides to go on the adventure, it’s like, well, that's resolved now, there was no decision that
he makes that kind of, in the end, well neither of them, at the end of the film, that kind of has been the result of them changing in any way.
For me, his friendship circle at the beginning of the film, talking about their feelings and what they lost is absolutely important for Cap making this decision.
I went in the ice and forty five right after I met the love of my life. Woke up seventy years later. You gotta move on. You gotta move on.
And he has realized that through experiencing everyone else's loss, because it's interesting, it's telling that he is the one leading the group and telling them to move on because he’s, actually, in a way, he's already lost everything when he went into the ice, right.
So I think that is allowed. It's all that stuff, the beating that actually gives him permission to go on, be with Peggy at the end, right?
Yeah, I completely agree.
I don't think he would have made this decision at the end of WINTER SOLDIER.
So I actually think his journey is more clearly obvious than Iron Man.
But that's also because I've just feel that way about the Iron Man character. Tony Stark’s fun,
but I don't actually think he's changed since IRON MAN one, but I think they’re putting him under more pressure and it's that character loop thing.
He's just revealing more of the essence of who he is. But I don't think he is surely challenged, whereas I think Steve Rogers had has a relatively more interesting journey in that way.
But I think the most interesting journey of all these characters is Thor, and it's very telling that we haven’t talked about him at all, because he is actually the most… he’s the richest character because they are pushing him.
But they’ve also made that decision about Thor, whereas Captain America, about you do good for good sake, right?
And then it is one choice at the— Well, this is actually his most real choice of them all.
Yeah, but I mean, I would add also that you can't just have Captain America retire. I mean, that's the thing. You can't have this moment two movies ago.
It goes back to what I said about Iron Man. I mean, you have to make it to where it's okay for them to move on in this way.
So that's the other thing that I really like,
that  worked for me, is that it's just that he retires because now I have a time machine and I know how to find Peggy.
It's like he retires because he's like, they're going to be fine, you know? It's like I just fought like the biggest intergalactic invasion, and I was surrounded by people that are, like, more powerful than me. And they were doing fine. They were kicking ass.
So, I think that they set up the table in a weight again through like twenty, twenty one movies in a way that allows his character to make this decision now in a way that it couldn't have been made,
You know, at the end of WINTER SOLDIER, or at the end of CIVIL WAR. I get to the end of ENDGAME, and I buy that Captain America would retire.
And that's, you know, not just because of the decisions we saw him make on screen, but also because of everything else that happened around him.
Could I ask you a question? Just pose a scenario for you. He's back in 1970. He spotted Peggy. He's got the Pym particles. He goes back up to Tony, hands over the Pym particles and says, “Go on without me. I'm staying.”
He's done his job. He's found the infinity stones. He's handed them back. They're going to undo the snap. He’s—
I don’t buy it. Captain America is not going to be okay until it's all good.
Yeah, I was going to say, if that's your perception of doing a job that I never want to work with you, Chas.
Oh, it's all good. I synced the files in Resolve. Bye now.
But it would at least dramatize him making a choice. And, you know, Tony could say, “All right, no Cap, Come on, let's get the job done,” and then he goes.
Okay, so we need to be very clear here. Issue isn't because the choice is clearly dramatized.
We know he made that choice. And look, and I'm going to compare it to the Game of thrones episode dealing with Sansa, and
we have no idea about whether or not she was at all involved in decision making with the Knights of the Vale turning up when they did, right, we still don't really know.
It's very clear that Captain America made the decision to change with Peggy.
It wasn't the machine broke, that was a very active choice. And that is very clear, right?
Do you disagree with that? What you mean by dramatization is being within the moment when they've made that decision.
And understanding it, because I would agree with Julio the on second and third watch, that moment with Tony and Doctor Strange,
that is when he's making a decision, and we are with the character that is making the decision. It's just we don't understand as the audience that that's what's happening.
But we do understand that he is making a decision. I mean, even if you don't know what's happening, you do.
I mean, you know, they don't do those slow mo close ups for nothing.
I mean, you do realize that he's making a decision at that point. It's just that, I guess, on first watch the magnitude of it doesn't really hit you until you get to the end.
But I think that when you see, and we're back on Iron Man, when you see Tony and close up slow mo like watching Doctor Strange lift his finger,
I mean, I would imagine ninety-nine percent of us thought, okay, well, he's going to go at it with Thanos and he's probably not going to make it.
So I don't think that we kind of, like, made the full on rationalization of like, “Oh, but he's doing it because of this and this and this”,
but you do get the feeling that there's a decision being made that and you kinda have an idea what consequences it’s going to happen to have.
This ties into the Unfilmables episode, which is probably going to be out after this, is literally a close up off a slow push in on Doctor Strange raising his finger and a slow push in
on iron man. We know he's making a decision.
He doesn't know that he's like, he's choosing to stab himself through the heart with the knife. There is a version of this where he might survive. He's prepared to take that risk. He’s making the decision to act.
Not if his decision is to take the gauntlet, then he knows that, that I'm going to die.
Yeah. Yeah, I think that he knows that he's dying.
But he doesn't talk about that with Hulk? Isn't Hulk wanting to use the gauntlet? And he's like, “Well, specifically this suit’s designed to withstand it.”
No. Thor volunteers. And then the Hulk says that he's the one that's the most equipped to withstand the snap.
Okay, so there was a version of that choice that was offered up before this, like at the end of the second act, and Tony Stark chooses not to volunteer, and he pointedly doesn't volunteer.
But when push comes to shove, he volunteers, and you're saying that he doesn't change?
Yes, Q.E.D., motherfucker.
But what is he volunteering for? A suicide mission. Like to me, it’s clearly like he doesn't even know if he could do the snap.
Yes, but he knows it's extremely dangerous, and he chooses not to, and then he does it anyway.
So the point is, there is a lot of change going on. The fact that you don't think it is a complete reversal of who the character is—
I don't need a reversal, and there are a whole lot of what I would call decisions being made along the way, like, the point is that any moment that they're making these decisions,
I'm not there with them, seeing or being told what the options are and what the consequences of those options are. I have no access to the interiority of the character when they're making those decisions and what's at stake for them for making those decisions.
Which is why they played as reveals. So in the case of Steve Rogers, it would be,
it's literally a scene of him explaining to another character giving character exposition right, which is pretty boring and inert.
There is a version where Tony, we actually see him make the video recording at the end, or start to, like, that he has got to do that kind of like, looks at his daughter and does it.
And for me, it wouldn't necessarily undermine the film that it is and will probably give more gravitas or contrast if you see him being really quite heartfelt towards his daughter and they cut to him being really joking with Steve Rogers that he's putting on a front.
To me that would kind of deepen more of my understanding of who character, who Tony is because you're seeing contrast, right?
You've seen the contrast of him being heartfelt and understanding that he is possibly not going to make it. But then he's telling Steve something else, right?
Okay. I think that there's something to be said also for just the awesomeness of that reveal, w hen you see that he has the infinity stones and the moment that you see that he has infinity stones you as the audience.
You realize, okay, that said, he's dead. Right? And
if you put in that call to his daughter, I think that you slow things out things out too much.
And you I think you allow the audience to maybe get a head of what's happening.
I'm not saying within the context of that climax as they structured it on that decision, there's no way that slowing it down would have worked. I'm not saying that what my solution is a good one or an ideal one.
It's just my observation is that to me, the issues for me is that they made a ll the decisions as characters at the end of the first act and then in the
final act, when they are making what is supposed to be the big,
climactic resolution choice for their characters,
We are not with them when they're making it.
But we are. We like we literally see Tony and get all the stones stuck in his gauntlet.
We've had this discussion already three times.
I'm still failing to understand.
No, I think that I think that Chas’ issue is not that, because we do see them make the decision is just that when we see him there for at least the first time you're watching the movie,
when you see him make the decision, you don't understand the full ramifications of what he's decided.
You just know that he made a decision and that's it.
It doesn't bother me. I'm fine. I think I really enjoyed the reveals.
Part of it might have to do with, you know, like I said, we're twenty one movies in so anyway that they can freshen things up.
That's fine. You know, I like the way that it's structure in a way that, you know, it's more about surprises.
Big reveals instead of deliberation because we know these characters so well by now, I think that we have the shortcuts to really understand why they did what they did.
So I mean to me, like the visual payoff of seeing the stones, of seeing an old cap, you know, all that stuff,
it's, I think, so, rewarding that I don't need the rationalization.
It's cinema, man.
Yes, and look, it worked for you guys. And Lord knows, it probably seems to have worked for the vast majority of people.
And it's just something that I can now be conscious of in my own
writing, is the difference in the effect on the audience about, you know, putting the audience with the character when they're making a choice, as opposed to revealing afterwards what that choice was.
Yeah, but it's interesting. I think the lesson you, possibly, my learning is about,
It's an interesting question for you to ponder about this film has obviously been a very effective for a lot of people, and those moments hit them really hard.
So the question for you, I think, as a writer, and I'm making it a generic you because this is something I think we can all reflect on, is if they didn't work for you, why didn't they work for you?
But whether what you would have done would have worked for other people, because I'm not telling writers to be inauthentic,
but there is, when it's a technical question like this, which is like, we know this is going to happen.
What is the effect on the audience, and often reveals are where the emotion is, right? And a film like this is us saying goodbye the characters rather than it being a kind of,
Mamet, in the moment, experiencing the world with the characters.
This film was an opportunity for us to say with his characters, so you literally get a shut of Tony Stark lying down and people coming up to say goodbye to him, alright, and they have a funeral.
Oh, man. I was crying at that point on the first watch, and the second watch, and the third watch.
The thing is, what you have suggested may have satisfied you dramatically better, but maybe you wouldn't have had those emotional moments of the film makes its prioritized emotion over dramatic immediacy.
And that's what we're really on some levels talking about the dramatic immediacy of this where these films are a lot more manipulative about what they're doing. They're not making you feel like you're,
I don't feel like I'm just sitting here watching these characters in the moment. I know I'm being manipulated by master filmmakers. There's no sense of trying to be, yes, like there is a third hand here that I'm aware of, personally, and that doesn't bother me.
Right. But also we should all be so lucky to at some point, have the opportunity to, you know, to write a screenplay that deals with characters that, having been established for so long and they were so successful that we're allowed to use the shorthand, the emotional shorthand to get to those moments.
I guess looking at it as like, screenwriters are just, you know, not in those leagues then, yeah.
I mean, maybe the Chas way is the way to go because, you know, you're not dealing with IP that's recognized,
that has, like such emotional resonance already that you can, you know, you can get by without showing all those moments that are not working for Chas, or the moments that are missing for Chas and still get an emotional response.
Like I think if you're just writing a random story about a superhero that nobody knows, maybe it's a lot harder to get that reaction.
So I mean, it's, I guess, because you guys are always trying to pivot your, everything that, your discussions to something that the average screenwriter can use.
I think that we can't lose sight of the fact that yeah, well, there—  the screenwriters of AVENGERS
ENDGAME had sort of like, the curse and the advantage of having all those past ten years of lore and fandom and all that stuff.
So I think that when you have that, you can take those shortcuts or you can make those decisions that give you that surprise, the benefit of the  reveals.
And then it's okay, where you know, if you're dealing with a different kind of property, a smaller property, maybe you shouldn't.
Absolutely. It comes down to taste like I went into this movie kind of expecting to see the farewell to Cap and Tony, and
then I felt that I was missing any kind of narrative deepening or understanding of their characters, whereas what they played on was, these are the characters that narrative deepening happened over the last twenty one movies.
You're now here just to revel emotionally in the end of them, but we've all got to go. Thank you, Julio for being up at
two o'clock in the morning, the day that he's flying away on his honeymoon, to record a Draft Zero episode with us.
What a great start to my vacation.
Maybe one day we'll come back and look at Thor’s journey because I think Thor’s journey is in stark contrast to this.
His decision to get up and fight in the third act is a huge reversal or a huge sort of climactic triumph of him over what he's gone through as a result of the snap, not just him going “well,
I'm a hero, and I'm going to keep heroing right now.”
You have to do all three whore films \ all three Thor films, and INFINITY WAR too, I think, to do an effective breakdown of his character journey, possibly worth doing.
But yes, I think to get the final final word,
This is making me want to relisten to catharsis, our episode on catharsis, because I think part of one of the ways that catharsis works is through revelation that you catch up to the film, rather than you are in the moment with the character of the film.
Kind of separates yourself, so you have to catch up to the characters, and that's part of how you experience the emotion.
And I think the fact that, ultimately, what makes this film really difficult to break down is it, as much as it's a standalone film, it is the final act of a series of films.
So it's got, like, that stuff writ large and playing this stuff out is revelation, I think is about trying to, even if it is not too fast for, say, trying to have that feeling close to catharsis.
You should open with that, too, would have been done in, like, ten minutes.
Well, we can do it in the edit.
Put it right at the beginning. Yeah, actually, it's not catharsis. It's for lack of a better word, grief.
Goodbyes are always post decision there. Post the event, you know, even the way they were talking about break ups or death.
The goodbye is after the event has happened. Even if we're with someone as they're dying to say goodbye, we know it's inevitable.
You don't plan ahead for that stuff. So in the context of this film, they're letting the audience say goodbye.
And for some people, it probably is that letting go, and it is similar to grief.
It's a kind of form of catharsis. So it has to happen after the fact to give us that moment of processing. That's why there is quite literally a funeral at the end of the film for Tony, you know, so we can process that.
You see, that happens to explain why I actually react so strongly to the ending. Chas is mad that Tony didn’t say goodbye to his daughter. But I'm just glad that we got to say goodbye to him.
Yeah, and seems to always happen with us.
We kind of only understand our thesis or right at the end, but I think, Stu, I think
That's why you're raising catharsis. Because catharsis is about putting the audience in relationship with their own emotions.
It's distancing them from the film. You're not with the character.
You're not empathising with them. You're with yourself essentially, and that's what this film is doing.
It structured that way so that the audience at these points is in their own relationship with Tony and Steve.
And, clearly, that is a brilliant craft decision that works for most people, including you, Julio.
And maybe, as you say, Julio, ‘cause this is a finale off the back of twenty odd other films.
And maybe that is what was missing for me is that I wanted to be with the characters more.
I wanted to have the experiences I had in previous films where I was with them, as opposed to watching them, and or maybe I'm just dead inside.
And that's a good opportunity, even though this is a short episode, to thank our patrons.
In particular superhero patreons who bring you the most Draft Zero most often Matteo, Nick, Daniel, Carrie,
the relentlessly inexhaustible Chris, who is cutting our other episodes, Paul, Sandra, Rob, and Cross.
We are actually looking at remastering all the old Steven Cleary episodes.
So if you're interested in supporting that particular project, as well as exporting more Draft Zero more often, please consider joining us on Patron. Or you could buy some merchandise, like hoodies, which pretty much the only person that models the hoodies is me.
That will be the thumbnail chapter image for this moment is Stu.
Thank you so much Julio!
Yeah, we are the contrarians.
It's nothing like this stuff.
Well, in in a good way, I'm going to plug your your podcast for you.
Julio and Alex rage against the rotten tomato machine in their podcast called We Are The Contrarians where they look at films that either score really high or really low on rotten tomatoes and
then take the contrary in position, and
finally, in the final section of the podcast they actually tell you how they really feel about the films.
And it's really great what you can learn, and enjoy hearing people tear down films that you love or big up terrible movies and some of your best episodes,
I think Julio covered some real gems among the rotten tomatoes dumpster.
We just watched the GUILT TRIP, which that episode should be other time that this comes out, and I had never seen it, and it was actually okay. It's like a twenty something, I think, around on rotten tomatoes. Everybody trashed it when he came out.
It's not like a great movie, but it's not a horrible movie. And it was one of those things where I was like, you know, kind of like a GREEN BOOK.
They do have a great GREEN BOOK episode.
Yeah, the pleasant surprises are the best.
All right, thanks everyone. Anna’s got to go to work. So I've got to go and be a father. Unlike Tony.
But why start now, Chas? was that fully dramatized?
I hope you all feel like arguing with either Stu or myself about anything on this episode or anything in general, and you can find many ways of getting in touch with us at our website at Draft hyphen Zero dot com. At the website,
you’ll also find the show notes for this and all our other episodes, as well as links to support us and spread the word for free by a rating and review on Apple podcast.
Very important for spreading word. Or if you think that what we do here is worth a dollar, or preferably more than a dollar, then you can also find links to our Patron page two support us getting these episodes to you quicker.
Thanks. And thanks for listening.